DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

The following definitions apply to OAR Chapter 817, Divisions 5 through 120.
(1) "Adequate ventilation" means ventilation by natural or mechanical methods that removes or
exhausts fumes, vapors, or dust to prevent hazardous conditions from occurring in accordance
with OAR Chapter 437, Division 2, or to allow the free flow of air in a room in proportion to the
size and capacity of the room.
(2) "Affidavit of Licensure" means an original document or other approved means of verifying
licensure history, including information disclosing all unresolved or outstanding penalties and
disciplinary actions. Refer to OAR 331-030-0040.
(3) "Article" means those items that complement services provided in the practice of barbering,
hair design, esthetics, or nail technology, including, but not limited to, neck-strips, towels or
linens, and cloth or plastic capes.
(4) "Authorization" has the definition set forth in ORS 676.562 and means a certificate, license,
permit, or registration issued by the Health Licensing Office that allows a person to practice one
of the occupations or professions or maintain a facility subject to the authority of the boards and
councils listed in ORS 676.565.
(5) "Barbering" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(6) “Board” means the Board of Cosmetology.
(7) "Chemical service" means the use of any product that restructures or removes hair or
changes the shape or appearance of skin, hair or nails.
(8) "Common area" means an area of a facility that is used by all authorization holders
performing services, including, but not limited to, reception areas, dispensing areas, sinks,
shampoo bowls, hair dryers, hair dryer areas, and employee lounges.
(9) “Dermaplaning” means the use of a blade with a handle to remove dead skin cells and vellus
hairs from the face.
(10) "Disinfect" means using a process to destroy harmful organisms, including bacteria,
viruses, germs, and fungi.
(11) "Dispensing area" means an area with nonporous surfaces and a sink with hot and cold
running water where service preparations are conducted, including, but not limited to, mixing of
chemicals, cleaning of tools and implements, mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances,
devices and equipment, disposing of residues, and rinsing parts of the body exposed to
chemicals.
(12) "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(13) “Epidermis” has the definition set forth under OAR 817-015-0045.
(14) "Equipment" means those items needed to operate a facility, including, but not limited to,
waiting chairs, barber or styling chairs, shampoo chairs, cabinets, sinks, shampoo bowls,
stationary dryers, pedicure bowls or whirlpool foot spas, paraffin wax containers, and nail
technology tables.
(15) "Esthetics" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(16) “Esthetics device” has the definition set forth under OAR 817-015-0040.
(17) "Facility" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(18) “FDA” means the United States Food and Drug Administration.
(19) "Field of practice" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(20) "Fire-retardant container" means an airtight metal container for disposing of chemical waste
or storing linens with chemical residue.
(21) "Freelance authorization" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(22) "Hair design" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(23) “HECC” means Higher Education Coordinating Commission.
(24) “High-level disinfectant" means a chemical agent, that has demonstrated tuberculocidal
activity and is registered with the EPA.
(25) "Independent contractor" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(26) "Low-level disinfectant" means a chemical agent that has demonstrated bactericidal,
germicidal, fungicidal, and limited virucidal activity and is registered with the EPA.
(27) "Materials and supplies" means those items that complement the use of tools and
implements, mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances or devices, including but not
limited to hair tints, bleaches, permanent wave solutions, hair oils, shampoos, wax, rinses,
disinfectants, and chemicals.
(28) “Mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliance, or device” has the definition set forth in ORS
690.005.
(29) "Nail technology" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(30) “Natural hair care” has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(31) “Natural person” means a living, individual, human being.
(32) “Natural physiological effect” has the definition set forth in OAR 817-015-0045.
(33) "Office" means the Health Licensing Office.
(34) "Official transcript" means a document prescribed by the Office showing proof an applicant
has completed all curriculum requirements adopted by the Board for each field of practice the
applicant is enrolled under and has completed. An official transcript must be submitted directly
to the Office from a school by mail, email, or fax. An official transcript must include:
(a) Applicant identity information, including first and last name and date of birth;
(b) Enrollment information including date of enrollment, last date of attendance, withdrawal date
if applicable, and graduation date;
(c) Each field of practice the applicant has completed;
(d) Specific hours and number of practical operations completed for each field of practice;
(e) Final practical examination scores for each field of practice and the date each practical
examination was administered;
(f) A signature from an authorized representative on file with the Office;
(g) School name and location;
(h) Type of school;
(i) School stamp, school seal, or notarization.
(35) "Practitioner" has the definition set forth in ORS 690.005.
(36) "Premises" means the entire area of a facility, licensed by the Office as a facility defined
under ORS 690.005.
(37) “School” means an educational establishment that offers a program of study in one or more
fields of practice other than natural hair care, including, but not limited to, a career school
licensed under ORS 345.010 to 345.450, including a proficiency-based career school, a
community college, an educational establishment operated by a school district, Oregon Youth
Authority, or Department of Corrections.
(38) "Sharp-edged or pointed, non-electrical tools and implements" means those items that may
come in contact with blood-borne pathogens and other potentially hazardous materials,
including, but not limited to, dermaplaning blades with handles, lancets, razors, cuticle nippers,
cuticle pushers, nail clippers, tweezers, comedone extractors, shears, and metal nail files.
(39) "Soiled" means an article that has been used and has not been cleaned or disinfected for
use on the next client.
(40) “Superficial peel” means a chemical peel that does not extend beyond the stratum basale
(basal layer). This does not include enzymes and other solutions that act only on the stratum
corneum.
(41) "Tools and implements" means all portable articles and instruments, that the authorization
holder uses when performing services on clients, including, but not limited to, combs, brushes,
shears, clippers and yoyettes. Tools and implements do not include mechanical or electrical
apparatus, appliances, or devices.
(42) “Very superficial peel” means a chemical peel that does not extend beyond the stratum
spinosum. This does not include enzymes and other solutions that act only on the stratum
corneum.
(43) "Work area" means an area where services are performed and preparations are conducted,
including, but not limited to, shampoo areas, workstations, and dispensing areas.
Elections
The chairperson of the Board must be elected annually. Elections must be held during the last
regularly scheduled Board meeting of the year or if canceled, the next regularly scheduled
meeting. Terms of office run from January 1 to December 31.
Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 690.175 & ORS 676.615
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 690.175

Vacancies in Office
If the chairperson is unable to complete the term, the Board will elect another chairperson.
Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 690.175 & ORS 676.615
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 690.175

Duties of Officer
(1) The chairperson must preside at all meetings. The chairperson must confer with the Office
on matters that occur between meetings and matters that need to be placed on the Board
meeting agendas. The chairperson may order or reorder the agenda.
(2) If the chairperson cannot attend a meeting or a portion of the meeting, the Board must vote
to elect another Board member to serve as chairperson for the specific meeting.
(3) Decisions will be made by a vote of the Board and carried out with a motion and second and
vote by majority.
Division 6
PRACTITIONER CERTIFICATE QUALIFICATIONS

Practitioner Certificate in a Field of Practice
(1) A practitioner certified in a field of practice under ORS 690.046, may perform services in a
field of practice defined under ORS 690.005.
(2) A practitioner certificate is valid for two years and becomes inactive on the last day of the
month two years from the date of issuance.
(3) A practitioner must meet and adhere to all applicable requirements listed under OAR
Chapter 817, divisions 8, 10, 15, and 60.
(4) A practitioner must notify the Office within 30 calendar days of changes in employment
status pursuant to OAR 331-010-0040.

Board Approved Curriculum
(1) Pursuant to SB 217 (2023), a school that teaches a curriculum in a field of practice that was
approved by the HECC before July 1, 2024, may continue to teach the curriculum after July 1,
2024, unless the Office determines that the curriculum must be approved. The curriculum in
place prior to July 1, 2024, is available upon request to the Office or HECC.
(2) Beginning July 1, 2024, the Board has adopted and implemented the following curriculum for
each field of practice:
(a) Hour-based schools: hours and practical operations for each field of practice are as follows:
(A) Barbering: 746 hours and 465 practical operations.
(B) Esthetics: 444 hours and 220 practical operations.
(C) Hair design: 1110 hours and 455 practical operations.
(D) Nail technology: 241 hours and 70 practical operations.
(b) Proficiency-based schools: Practical operations for each field of practice are as follows:
(A) Barbering: 465 practical operations.
(B) Esthetics: 220 practical operations.
(C) Hair design: 455 practical operations.

(D) Nail technology: 70 practical operations.
(3) Safety, infection control and blood borne pathogens education and training must be
incorporated in each practical operation identified in subsection (2) of this rule.
(4) In addition to the requirements listed in subsections (2) and (3) of this rule, a student must
successfully complete 20 hours of career development and 20 hours of Oregon laws and rules,
for a total of 40 additional hours.
(5) Completion of required hours for career development and Oregon laws and rules listed in
subsection (4) of this rule is required once, regardless of the number of fields of practice the
student completes.
(6) A person teaching, instructing, or supervising the education and curriculum required under
subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this rule must hold an active certification issued by HLO in the
field of practice in which they are teaching, instructing or supervising. If a person is certified in
hair design and esthetics or barbering, they may teach barbering.
(7) All practical operations must be performed under the supervision of a person listed under
subsection (6) of this rule.
(8) A student may not perform a practical operation until the school determines the student has
met all competencies for the practical operation. For example, if a student has completed the
theory portion of learning a “facial” and the school determines the student is competent, the
student may begin performing “facials.”
(9) The student-to-teacher ratio while practical operations are being performed is as follows:
(a) 1–15 students present — one registered teacher;
(b) 16–30 students present — two registered teachers;
(c) One additional registered teacher for each additional 20 students or part thereof.
(10) For purposes of this rule, a “practical operation” is the demonstration and hands-on
application of a relevant skill or group of skills necessary for work in a field of practice.
(11) A school must meet all requirements set forth by the school’s regulatory authority,
including, but not limited to, maintaining student records, instructional design, and authorization
to teach.
(12) Upon request by the Office, a school must provide the curriculum currently in use at the
school at the time of the request from the Office.
(13) A school must submit a copy of their current curriculum to the Office by December 31,
2024. The purpose of the school submitting their current curriculum under this subsection is for
Office record-keeping only.
(14) A school may be required to submit additional information upon request from the Office.
(15) A school must have a copy of their current curriculum on file at all times.

(16) HLO may at any time review a school curriculum in a field of practice against the
requirements listed in this rule and will notify each school requiring they submit their curriculum
for approval.
(17) The Office may require a school to apply to have their curriculum, in one or more fields of
practice, reviewed and approved for the following circumstances, including, but not limited to:
(a) The Office receives information that a school’s curriculum in a field of practice does not meet
the Board’s requirements.
(b) The Office performs an audit of school curriculum in a field of practice.
(c) The Board revises the curriculum in a field of practice.

School Curriculum Application Requirements
(1) The Office will determine if new or existing schools must have their curriculum reviewed and
approved. Schools must fulfill the requirements of these rules, including, but not limited
to, completion of an Office prescribed application.
(2) The applicant must be a natural person.
(3) When applying for approval of a curriculum, the applicant must provide the following
information on a form prescribed by the Office:
(a) Name of school.
(b) Type of school as defined under OAR 817-005-0005.
(c) Physical and mailing address of school.
(d) Name of person responsible for the school program and the curriculum in a field of practice.
(e) Contact information, including phone number and email address, for a person listed in (3)(d)
of this rule.
(f) Fields of practice being taught.
(g) Identify whether the school is an hour or proficiency-based school.
(4) An applicant for a proposed school must provide proof that the proposed school has started
the process of becoming a school or part of a school program or being authorized to teach a
curriculum in a field of practice under the proposed school’s regulatory authority. Proof may
include, but is not limited to, written notification from the regulatory authority, receipt of having
submitted an application, or fees paid to the regulatory authority. Examples of regulatory
authorities are as follows:
(a) Department of Corrections.
(b) Community colleges.
(c) Oregon Department of Education.
(d) Oregon Youth Authority.
(e) Higher Education Coordinating Commission.
(5) The applicant must submit the school’s proposed curriculum in each field of practice that the
school will offer prior to the school teaching or instructing in a field of practice. The proposed
curriculum must meet the requirements listed in OAR 817-006-0002, including hours and
practical operations. Examples of proposed curriculum may include, but are not limited to, a
syllabus or program map for each field of practice.
(6) Notwithstanding subsection (3), if a school is revising a previously approved curriculum, the
school must fulfill the requirements of this rule and submit a summary of curriculum revisions,
including revisions in hours or practical operations for each field of practice.

Practitioner Certificate Application Requirements for Hair Design, Barbering, Nail
Technology, and Esthetics
An individual applying for a certification in a field of practice must:
(1) Meet the requirements of OAR 331 Division 30.
(2) Submit a completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the
information listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of all required fees.
(3) Meet all education, training and examination requirements in effect at the time of application
through one of the following pathways;
(a) Pathway 1: Oregon School. On a form prescribed by the Office an applicant who graduated
from an Oregon school must:
(A) Submit an official transcript from a school showing proof the applicant has completed a
Board-approved curriculum listed in OAR 817-006-0002 for each field of practice. If an applicant
has completed multiple fields of practice, then one official transcript may be used.
(B) Submit a passing score of a Board-approved practical examination listed under OAR 817-
006-0075. Practical examination scores are valid for five years from the date the practical
examination was completed and passed.

(C) Pass the applicable Board-approved written examinations listed in OAR 817-006-0075 for
each field of practice in which certification is sought within two years of the date of application
including the Oregon laws and rules examination. An applicant with a current certification who is
seeking to add a field of practice must pass the Oregon laws and rules examination within two
years of applying for the additional field of practice.
(D) An applicant is not required to submit an official transcript for each field of practice required
in pathway 1 of this rule if the applicant was previously certified in Oregon.
(b) Pathway 2: Reciprocity. An applicant who holds an active authorization issued in another
state or territory of the United States or another country and the active authorization has not
been subject to disciplinary action by the authorizing body may have all or part of the
requirements described in pathway 1 of this rule waived by the Office and be allowed to take a
written examination listed in subsection (C) of this rule. On a form prescribed by the Office an
applicant must:
(A) Submit an affidavit of licensure pursuant to OAR 331-030-0040 from another state or
territory of the United States or another country, showing the authorization is active with no
current disciplinary action.
(B) Attest to having education or training, including education or training obtained in the military,
that is substantially equivalent to Oregon’s certification requirements listed in pathway 1 of this
rule.
(C) Passes the applicable Board-approved written examinations listed in OAR 817-006-0075 for
each field of practice in which certification is sought within two years of the date of application
including the Oregon laws and rules examination.
(c) Pathway 3: Non-credentialed. An applicant who received education or training outside of
this state and does not hold an active authorization issued by another jurisdiction may have all
or part of the requirements described in pathway 1 of this rule waived by the Office and be
allowed to take a written examination listed in subsection (C) of this rule. On a form prescribed
by the Office an applicant must:
(A) Submit documentation from a school showing the applicant has passed a skills assessment
and practical evaluation for each field of practice in which certification is sought. Passage of a
Board-approved practical examination listed in subsection (3)(c)(B) of this rule is considered
sufficient proof of having passed the skills assessment and practical evaluation.
(B) Submit a passing score of a Board-approved practical examination. Practical examination
scores are valid for five years from the date the practical examination was completed and
passed.
(C) Pass the applicable Board-approved written examinations listed in OAR 817-006-0075 for
each field of practice in which certification is sought within two years of the date of application,
including the Oregon laws and rules examination.
(D) The school must:

(i) On a form prescribed by the Office, attest to having received documentation to verify the
applicant’s prior training or education. Documentation may include, but is not limited to,
unofficial transcripts, copies of inactive or expired licenses, training certificates, apprenticeship
and on-the-job training records, and military records.
(ii) Retain documentation used to verify the applicants prior training or education for at least five
years. Documentation may be kept electronically.
(iii) Provide documentation used to verify the applicants prior training or education to the Office
upon request.
(iv) Submit additional information upon request from the Office.
(4) Upon passage of all required examinations and before receipt of certificate, the applicant
must pay all certification fees.
(5) If an applicant has not passed all required written examinations within two years of the date
of initial application, the applicant must reapply and pay all required fees.
(6) The Office may require additional information or documentation to substantiate the
applicant’s eligibility to be issued an authorization.
(7) An applicant is responsible for payment of fees assessed by an organization when obtaining
required documentation.
Practitioner Certificate Application Requirements for Natural Hair Care
An individual applying for a certification in natural hair care must:
(1) Meet the requirements of OAR 331 Division 30.
(2) Submit a completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the
information listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees.
(3) Submit proof of having completed the informational training modules regarding natural hair
care available on the Office Website.
(4) Pass the Board-approved written natural hair care examination within two years of the date
of application.
(5) If an applicant has not passed all required examinations within two years of the date of initial
application, the applicant must reapply and pay all required fees.

General Examination Information
(1) Practical examination: The Board recognizes and sanctions the practical examination
administered by a school.
(2) Written examination: The Board-approved written examination consists of one or more fields
of practice examinations and the Oregon laws and rules examination.
(3) Each written examination will be scored individually. The passing score for each
examination, including natural hair care, is 75 percent or better.
(4) Examination candidates must adhere to the maximum time allowance for each examination,
as established by the Office.
(5) Written examination applicants may be electronically monitored during testing.
(6) An applicant may not take notes or bring textbooks or notebooks into the written examination
area.
(7) No electronic equipment or communication devices, such as personal computers, pagers or
cellular telephones or any other devices deemed inappropriate by the Office, are allowed in the
written examination area.
(8) An applicant may be immediately disqualified during or after the examination for conduct that
interferes with the written examination. The examination may be invalidated, and written
examination fees may be forfeited. Such conduct includes, but is not limited to:
(a) Directly or indirectly giving, receiving, soliciting, or attempting to give, receive or solicit aid
during the written examination process.
(b) Taking items, including, but not limited to items listed in subsection (6) and (7) of this rule
into the written examination area.
(c) Removing or attempting to remove any examination-related information, notes or materials
from the written examination site.
(d) Failing to follow directions relative to the conduct of the written examination.
(e) Exhibiting behavior that impedes the normal progress of the written examination.
(9) The applicant may be required to reapply, submit additional examination fees, and request in
writing to schedule another examination if applicant is disqualified from taking the examination
for reasons under subsection (6), (7) and (8) of this rule.

Written Examination Retake Requirements
(1) An applicant may retake a failed examination the next business day up to the 10th failed
attempt.
(2) After the 10th failed attempt, the Board may determine qualifications before retaking the
failed exam, including but not limited to additional hours and practical operations from a school.
(3) An applicant retaking the examination must meet the requirements under OAR 331-030-
0000.

Special Examination Accommodations
(1) Applicants who qualify under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) may request a
special accommodation examination.
(2) Requests for accommodation must be made on forms provided by the Office and contain
supporting documentation completed by a licensed professional holding appropriate credentials
qualified to certify that the applicant's disabling condition requires the requested test
accommodation.
(3) Requests for accommodation must be submit 30 calendar days in advance of the preferred
examination date.
(4) All special accommodation examinations are conducted at the Office. If the Office is unable
to accommodate the disability, a suitable alternate location will be chosen by the Office.
Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 690.165, ORS 690.065, ORS 690.046 & ORS 676.615
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 690.065 & ORS 690.046
Division 7
LICENSING AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS

Facility License
(1) Pursuant to ORS 690.055, a facility license must be obtained when operating a business
establishment and providing services in one or more fields of practice defined in ORS 690.005.
(2) A facility license is valid for one year and becomes inactive on the last day of the month one
year from the date of issuance.
(3) The holder of a facility license must be a natural person, including but not limited to, a facility
owner, facility manager or any other natural person.
(4) A facility license is not transferable; the license is not transferable from person-to-person or
from location to location. If an existing facility moves or relocates to a new physical address, the
facility license holder must submit a new application and meet the requirements of OAR 817-
007-0025. A natural person may hold more than one facility license, but must submit a separate
application, pay required fees and qualify for a facility license for each location.
(5) A facility license holder must meet and adhere to all applicable requirements listed under
OAR Chapter 817, Divisions 7, 10, 15, 60, OAR 817-007-0050 and if applicable OAR 817-007-
0075.
(6) A facility license holder must notify the Office within 30 calendar days of changes in facility
name or assumed business name pursuant to OAR 331-010-0040.

Application Requirements for Facility Licensure
To obtain a facility license, the applicant must meet the requirements of OAR 331 Division 30
and submit:
(1) A completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the information
listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees;
(2) Proof of being at least 18 years of age. Documentation may include identification listed under
OAR 331-030-0000;
(3) A list of authorization holders providing services in the facility;
(4) The name of facility; and

(5) If the facility is not operating under the real and true name of each owner, the applicant must
provide appropriate documentation of being registered with the Secretary of State under ORS
648.

Facility Standards
(1) A facility license holder must:
(a) Comply with the notification requirements of OAR 331-010-0040;
(b) Allow the Office’s representative to inspect the facility or conduct an investigation.
Obstructing or hindering an investigation or inspection, threatening or exerting physical harm, or
enabling another individual or employee to impede an investigation or inspection may result in
disciplinary action pursuant to ORS 676.608 or 690.225.
(c) Comply with all applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Board and other state
agencies regarding health, safety, and infection control standards including those listed in OAR
817-010-0007.
(d) Require each authorization holder working within the facility premises providing services in a
field of practice to have the appropriate and required authorizations.
(2) All shared or common areas must be clean and sanitary and are the responsibility of each
authorization holder.
(3) Each authorization holder at a facility may be cited for violations of rules or regulations found
in the shared or common area of a facility, unless a contractual agreement exists that indicates
specific responsibility for the cleanliness of a shared or common area within the facility.
(4) When body piercing, electrology or tattoo services are provided in a cosmetology facility,
body piercing, electrology or tattoo services must be separated from cosmetology services by a
solid barrier to prevent contact with foreign materials.

Standards for Facilities Located in Residence
(1) A facility located in a residence must:
(a) Comply with all standards listed in OAR Chapter 817, Division 10 unless otherwise specified
by rule.

(b) Have an identifying house number and a sign with the facility name, that matches the one on
file with the Office, and is easily visible from the street, and indicates the location of the facility;
(c) Be equipped with the structures, accommodations, and equipment that the Office requires for
all facilities; and
(2) The living area of the home must be separated from the facility by solid walls extending from
floor to ceiling, with any connecting doors kept closed while the facility is in operation.
(3) An adequate supply of hot and cold running water must be available. Sinks in the restroom
do not qualify as a water source for a facility located within a residence.
(4) A separate entrance is not required for facilities located in a residence.
Temporary Facility
(1) A temporary facility permit holder defined under ORS 690.005 and issued under ORS
690.055, may perform services in a field of practice defined under ORS 690.005.
(2) The holder of a temporary facility permit must be a natural person.
(3) A temporary facility permit is valid for a limited time not to exceed 30 consecutive calendar
days.
(4) A temporary facility license holder must meet and adhere to all applicable requirements
listed under OAR Chapter 817, divisions 7, 10, 15, 60, OAR 817-007-0050 and, if applicable,
OAR 817-007-0075.
(5) If a facility owner licensed under OAR 817-007-0000 intends to operate a facility on a limited
basis, away from the facility address on file with the Office, they must obtain a temporary facility
permit.

Application Requirements for Temporary Facility Permit
(1) For the Office to issue a temporary facility permit, the applicant must:
(a) Meet the requirements of OAR Chapter 331 Division 30;
(b) Submit a completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the
information listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees;

(c) Submit proof of being at least 18 years of age. Documentation may include identification
listed under OAR 331-030-0000,
(d) Provide a list of authorization holders providing services in the temporary facility;
(e) Submit the name of the temporary facility; and
(2) If the temporary facility is not operating under the real and true name of each owner, the
applicant must provide appropriate documentation of being registered with the Secretary of
State under ORS 648.

Freelance Authorization
(1) Pursuant to ORS 690.123, a practitioner who provides services outside of a licensed facility
must hold a freelance authorization.
(2) A freelance license is valid for one year and becomes dormant on the last day of the month
one year from the date of issuance or renewal, unless renewed.
(3) A freelance license holder must meet and adhere to all applicable requirements listed under
OAR Chapter 817, divisions 7, 10, 15, and 60.
(4) A freelance authorization holder must notify the Office within 30 calendar days of any
information changes pursuant to OAR 331-010-0040.

Application Requirements for Freelance Authorization
To obtain a freelance authorization a practitioner must meet the requirements of OAR 331
Division 30 and submit:
(1) A completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the information
listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees.
(2) Proof of holding an active practitioner certificate.
(3) A current copy of the Assumed Business Name (ABN) filing if applicant is operating under an
assumed business name when applying for a freelance authorization. An ABN is not required if
business includes the real and true name of the owner. Refer to Secretary of State,
Corporations Division under ORS 648.

Freelance Authorization Standards
A holder of freelance authorization must:
(1) Provide each client with the Office’s name, address and telephone number;
(2) Display the practitioner's certificate number and freelance authorization number on all
advertising when soliciting business;
(3) Be subject to random audit to verify compliance with safety, infection control and licensing
requirements pursuant to ORS 690.123; and
(4) Allow the Office’s representative to conduct an investigation pursuant to ORS 676.608.
Obstructing or hindering the normal progress of an investigation, threatening or exerting
physical harm, or enabling another individual to impede an investigation may result in
disciplinary action pursuant to ORS 676.612 or ORS 676.992 and OAR 331-020-0070.

Independent Contractor
(1) Pursuant to ORS 690.057, a practitioner who provides services within a licensed facility and
who is not an employee must hold an independent contractor registration.
(2) An independent contractor must meet the criteria for independent contractor status in
accordance with ORS 690.035, 690.057, 670.600, and 657.040;
(3) An independent contractor registration is valid for one year and becomes dormant on the last
day of the month one year from the date of issuance or renewal.
(4) An independent contractor must comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the Board
and other state agencies and adhere to all applicable requirements listed under OAR Chapter
817, divisions 7, 10, 15, and 60.
(5) An independent contractor registration is transferable between work locations, provided the
Office is given notification as stated in OAR 331-010-0040.

Application Requirements for Independent Contractor Registration
To obtain an independent contractor registration, a practitioner must meet the requirements of
OAR Chapter 331 Division 30 and submit:
(1) A completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the information
listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees.
(2) Proof of being at least 18 years of age. Documentation may include identification listed under
OAR 331-030-0000.
(3) Proof of holding a current, valid practitioner certificate that is active and has no current
disciplinary action.
(4) A current copy of the Assumed Business Name (ABN) filing if applicant is operating under an
assumed business name when applying for an independent contractor registration. An ABN is
not required if business includes the real and true name of the owner. Refer to Secretary of

Independent Contractor Standards
(1) An independent contractor must allow the Office’s representative to inspect or conduct an
investigation pursuant to ORS 676.608 or 690.225. Obstructing or hindering an investigation or
inspection, threatening or exerting physical harm, or enabling another individual or employee to
impede an investigation or inspection may result in disciplinary action pursuant to ORS 676.612
or 676.992 and OAR 331-020-0070.
(2) The cleanliness and sanitary condition of any shared or common area used by, or provided
for, separately licensed facilities or independent contractors located at one premises is the
responsibility of each license or registration holder at that premises.
(3) Each authorization holder located at one facility may be cited for violations of rules or
regulations found in a shared or common area of a facility, unless a contractual agreement
exists that indicates specific responsibility for the cleanliness of a shared or common area within
the facility.
Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 690.057, ORS 690.165 & ORS 676.615
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 690.057

Demonstration Permit
(1) Pursuant to ORS 690.105, a person not certified under ORS 690.048 who wishes to
practice, demonstrate, and teach a field of practice, or perform a field of practice, temporarily
and primarily for educational purposes may obtain a demonstration permit.
(2) A demonstration permit is active for 30 days and is not renewable.
(3) The holder of the demonstration permit:
(a) May provide services in a field of practice defined under ORS 690.005.
(b) Must meet and adhere to all applicable requirements listed under OAR Chapter 817,
Divisions 7, 10, 15, and 60.
(c) May perform services at training seminars; shows; licensed facilities or other locations
approved by the Board.

Application Requirements for Demonstration Permit
To obtain a demonstration permit, an individual must meet the requirements of OAR Chapter
331 Division 30 and submit:
(1) A completed application form prescribed by the Office, which must contain the information
listed in OAR 331-030-0000 and be accompanied by payment of the required fees;
(2) An affidavit of licensure pursuant to OAR 331-030-0040 from another state, which is active
with no current or pending disciplinary action; and
(3) A description of the purpose for which the permit is sought.

Posting Requirements
(1) Freelance authorization, certificate, license, permit and registration holders are subject to the
requirements of OAR 331-030-0020.

(2) Facility licenses must be posted in public view.
(3) Independent contractor registrations must be posted in public view.
(4) Practitioner certificates must be posted in public view.
(5) Demonstration and temporary authorizations must be posted in public view.
(6) A freelance authorization holder must show the authorization to practice upon request of the
client.
(7) A facility license holder and independent contractor registration holder must post the most
recent inspection certificate in public view in the facility or at the independent contractor’s
workstation.

Division 8
RENEWAL INFORMATION

Issuance and Renewal of Authorizations
(1) An individual holding an authorization as defined in OAR 331-010-0000 is subject to the
provisions of OAR Chapter 331, Division 30 regarding the issuance and renewal of an
authorization and provisions regarding authorization to practice, identification, and requirements
for issuance of a duplicate authorization.
(2) An individual holding an authorization as defined in OAR 331-010-0000 is subject to the
provisions of ORS 690.046, 690.055, 690.057, 690.105 and 690.123 for issuance and renewal
of an authorization.
(3) AUTHORIZATION RENEWAL: Authorization renewal, with the exception of independent
contractor registration or freelance license, must be made prior to the authorization entering
inactive status. The authorization holder must submit the following for renewal:
(a) Renewal application form.
(b) If renewing a field of practice certificate attest to having current blood borne pathogens
training.
(c) Payment of required renewal fee pursuant to OAR 817-040-0003.
(4) INACTIVE AUTHORIZATION RENEWAL: An authorization, with the exception of
independent contractor registration or freelance license may be inactive for up to three years.
The authorization holder must submit the following for renewal:
(a) Renewal application form.
(b) If renewing a field of practice certificate, attest to having current blood borne pathogens
training.
(c) Payment of delinquency and authorization fees pursuant to OAR 817-040-0003.
(5) EXPIRED AUTHORIZATION: An authorization, with the exception of independent contractor
registration or freelance license, that has been inactive for more than three years, is expired and
the authorization holder must meet the requirements listed in OAR 817-007-0025 for facility
license holders and OAR 817-006-0025 or 817-006-0050 for practitioners.
(6) Independent contractor registrations and freelance authorization that are not renewed
become dormant; they do not become inactive and do not expire.
(7) To reactivate a dormant independent contractor registration or freelance authorization, the
authorization holder must complete required qualifications, submit a form prescribed by the
Office, and pay the required renewal fees.

(8) Independent contractor registrations and freelance authorization that are in dormant status
are not valid.
(9) For the purpose of this rule, reactivation means to renew an independent contractor or
freelance license registration that has been placed in dormant status.
(10) An authorization holder under (3) and (4) of this rule is required to attest to having current
blood borne pathogens training is selected for an audit of their current blood borne pathogens
training must be submitted to the Office, within 30 calendar days from the date of notification:
(a) Documentation of having current blood borne pathogens training during the renewal cycle in
which the authorization holder attested.
(b) Documentation listed in this subsection must be kept and maintained for five years.
(c) Documentation listed in this subsection must be available to the Office upon request.
(11) Individuals renewing a field of practice certificate under (3) and (4) of this rule must have
completed blood borne pathogens training by July 1, 2025.

Division 10
SAFETY AND INFECTION CONTROL

Compliance with All Applicable Regulations
Authorization holders must observe the Department of Human Services, Oregon Health
Authority, and all other applicable city, county, state and federal regulations and requirements.

Servicing Clients
When providing services in a field of practice an authorization holder must:
(1) Perform thorough hand washing with soap and water or other alternative hand-washing
products, such as gel, aerosol spray, foam, or packaged hand wipes, immediately before and
after serving each client to prevent cross contamination and exposure to blood or other
potentially infectious materials.
(2) Wear single-use disposable protective gloves when performing a service or procedure that
routinely involves exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials.
(3) Wear eye goggles, shields or a mask if spattering is likely to occur while services are being
performed.
(4) Dispose of refuse and waste materials that come in contact with blood or other potentially
infectious materials according to provisions of OAR 817-010-0060.

Water Supply Requirements and Standards
(1) An adequate and immediate supply of both hot and cold running water and wash basins
must be available:
(a) On the facility premises; and
(b) In any work area where hazardous materials are in use, that may have a harmful effect on or
be absorbed through the skin if the contamination is not removed.
(2) Sinks located in a restroom do not qualify as a water source for the facility.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this rule, if only natural hair care services are provided
within the facility, a sink located in the restroom qualifies as a water source.
(4) Washing accommodations must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(5) Hand soap or similar cleansing agents must be available.
(6) Individual towels of cloth or paper must be available. Air blowers for drying the hands may be
substituted for towels.
(7) Use of bar soap or a common towel or cloth is prohibited.

Restroom/Toilets and Water Disposal
(1) Restrooms must be available for employees. The restroom must be on the facility premises
or in an adjoining premise which is reasonably accessible from any work area.
(2) All restrooms on facility premises must be kept clean, sanitary and in proper working order at
all times.


(3) All liquid waste from toilets and sinks must be discharged directly into a public sewer or, in
the absence of a public sewer, by method meeting the requirements of ORS Chapter 454
(sewage treatment and disposal systems).

Towels or Linens
An authorization holder must:
(1) Use clean towels or linens for each client.
(2) Store clean towels and linens in a clean area.
(3) Use closable containers large enough and sturdy enough to store all soiled towels or linens.
(4) Store chemically soiled towels or linens in fire-retardant containers.
(5) Launder towels or linens by a regular commercial laundering or by a non-commercial
laundering process, which includes use of commercial laundry detergent manufactured for the
purpose of cleaning clothes, linens or other washable fabric, and immersion in hot water during
the hot water wash/rinse operation.

817-010-0040
Articles in Contact with a Client
(1) A neck strip or towel must be placed around the client's neck to prevent direct contact
between a common use hair cloth or cape and the client's skin.
(2) All items which come in direct contact with the client's skin but do not require disinfecting
must be clean.
(3) All articles which come in direct contact with the client's skin and cannot be cleaned or
disinfected must be disposed of in a covered waste receptacle immediately after use.

Materials in Contact with a Client and Use of Paraffin Wax
(1) All substances that come in direct contact with hair or skin, including wax, used within a field
of practice must be dispensed from containers in a manner that prevents contaminating of the
unused portion.
(2) Substances that are applied to and then removed from a client’s skin must be applied in
such a manner that prevents contamination of the substance remaining in the bath or container,
such as application with a single use spatula, or disposal of any used substance. This includes
but is not limited to: hair-removal waxes, pastes and gels; wax skin treatments; and nail
powders and liquids.
(3) All substances must be covered when not in use and maintained at a temperature specified
by the manufacturer’s instructions.
(4) All substances must be free of debris and foreign objects.
(5) All substances must be disposed of immediately after use in accordance with OAR 817-010-
0060.

Refuse and Waste Material
(1) All chemical waste material must be disposed of in a closed container at the conclusion of
each service and disposed of in a fire-retardant container at the end of each business day.
(2) All waste related to the performance of services must be disposed of in a covered container
to avoid cross-contamination with blood or other potentially infectious materials.
(3) All waste unrelated to performance of services must be disposed of in a covered waste
disposal container. Containers located in the reception area, which do not contain waste relating
to performance of services, are exempt from having covers.
(4) All outer surfaces of waste disposal containers must be kept clean.
(5) All waste that contains blood or other potentially infectious materials must be disposed of in
a glove or plastic bag and then disposed of in a covered container with a garbage liner
immediately following the service.
(6) All disposable, sharp-edged or pointed, nonelectrical tools and implements that come in
direct contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials must be disposed of in a sharps
container that is a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling,
storage, transportation, and disposal. The container must be labeled with the "biohazard"
symbol.
(7) Sealable plastic bags and biohazard labels, if applicable, must be available on the facility
premises at all times when services are being performed;
(8) All used wax must be disposed of and removed from the facility at the end of each business
day.

Disinfecting Non-Electrical Tools and Implements
(1) All tools and implements used within a field of practice must be disinfected or sterilized
before use on each client.
(2) All tools and implements that come in direct contact with clients, and cannot be disinfected or
sterilized, must be disposed of after use.
(3) Low-level disinfectants must meet the requirements defined under OAR 817-005-0005.
(4) High-level disinfectants must meet the requirements defined under OAR 817-005-0005.
(5) To disinfect nonelectrical tools and implements, the authorization holder must:
(a) Remove all hair and all foreign material;
(b) Clean thoroughly with soap or detergent and water;
(c) Rinse thoroughly with clear, clean water; and
(d) Complete process as outlined in section (6) or (7) of this rule; or
(e) Sterilize, using one of the approved methods listed in subsection (8) of this rule.
(6) For all tools and implements without sharp edges or points, including, but not limited to,
combs, brushes, rollers, rods, completely immerse according to manufacturer's instructions in a
solution containing l,000 parts per million (ppm) of a commercial quaternary ammonium
compound or other low-level disinfectant used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
(7) For all tools and implements with sharp edges or points, completely immerse in a high-level
disinfectant used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
(8) If sterilization equipment is used, the equipment must be maintained and used according to
manufacturer's instructions. Approved sterilization equipment is:
(a) Steam sterilizer, registered and listed with the FDA; or
(b) Dry heat sterilizer or autoclave, registered and listed with the FDA.
(9) Adequate disinfecting and sterilizing equipment must be maintained for the volume of
business and usage requirements for the number of authorization holders performing services,
(10) All disinfectants listed in subsection (3) and (4) of this rule must be kept at adequate
strengths to maintain effectiveness, be free of foreign material and be available for immediate
use at all times when the facility is open for business.

(11) Nail files, pumice blocks, cosmetic sponges, buffer blocks, sanding bands or sleeves,
orangewood sticks, disposable nail bits and other similar articles must be given to the client or
discarded after use on a client.
(12) Reusable protective gloves must be cleaned with soap, water and disinfected after each
use. Disposable protective gloves they must be discarded immediately after use.

Disinfecting Electrical Tools and Implements
(1) All electrical tools and implements, with the exception of clipper blades, must be disinfected
before each use. To disinfect electrical tools and implements:
(a) Remove all hair and all foreign material;
(b) Disinfect with a low-level disinfectant used according to the manufacturer's instructions.
(2) Electrical clipper blades must be disinfected before each use. The method is as follows:
(a) Remove all hair and all foreign material;
(b) Completely saturate clipper blade with a high-level disinfectant solution, spray, or foam used
according to the manufacturer's instructions.
(3) Electrical clipper blades may be sterilized, using one of the approved methods listed in OAR
817-010-0065(5)(b) or (c).

Storage of Tools and Implements
(1) New, disinfected and cleaned tools and implements must be stored separately from all
others.
(2) Roller-storage receptacles and their contents must be clean and free of foreign material.
(3) All storage drawers used for clean tools and implements must be clean, free of hair and used
only for clean tools and implements.
(4) Storage cabinets, work stations and vanities must be kept clean.

Hairpieces
(1) During the trying on of a manufactured hairpiece, that portion of the head which comes in
contact with the hairpiece must be completely covered with a disposable cover.
(2) All used hair goods must be cleaned according to manufacturer's instructions before resale
and marked as "used."

Pets in Facilities
Pets or other animals are not permitted in the business facility. This prohibition does not apply to
service animals recognized by the American with Disabilities Act or to fish in aquariums.

Equipment
(1) The surface of all equipment, including, but not limited to back-bars must be made of
cleanable non-porous material. This requirement does not apply to the reception area of a
facility where services are not performed.
(2) Shampoo bowls and sinks must be clean and free of hair and residue.
(3) All equipment must be clean and in good repair.
(4) All surfaces contaminated by blood or other potentially infectious materials must be
disinfected with a high-level solution according to manufacturer’s instructions.
(5) All areas of foot spa equipment must be cleaned and disinfected with a high-level
disinfectant after use on each client, including removal of safety drain screens and clearing of all
debris from the filtration system.

Floor Surface
(1) Floor surfaces in the working area of a facility must be made of a cleanable, non-porous
material and must be kept clean, orderly, and in good repair.
(2) Wooden floors which have a durable water-proof non-porous finish may be acceptable in
working areas of the facility.
(3) Hair clippings must not be allowed to accumulate and must be disposed of in a covered
container.

Walls and Ceilings
Walls and ceilings must be clean and free of condensation, mildew and excessive spots, or
peeling paint.

Division 15
PRACTITIONER ADDITIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING AND SCOPE OF PRACTICE
INFORMATION

Requirements and Standards
(1) Any product or manual, mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliance or device used in a
field of practice must meet all product registration requirements imposed by any federal, state,
county, city or other regulating authority.
(2) The following applies to any service, product, chemical, materials and supplies, tools and
implements, including sharp edged or pointed non-electrical tools and implements, or manual,
mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliance, or device that an authorization holder uses in a
field of practice:
(a) An item listed in subsection (2) of this rule is subject to Office inspection.
(b) The authorization holder must maintain and make available to the Office upon request all
manufacturer operation and usage documentation for an item listed in subsection (2) of this rule.
(c) The authorization holder is responsible for using an item listed in (2) in a manner that is
consistent with the manufacturer’s intended use.
(d) The authorization holder must obtain education or training before providing services or using
items listed in subsection (2) of this rule.
(3) The following requirements pertain to the education or training listed in subsection (2)(d) of
this rule:
(a) The education or training listed in subsection (2)(d) of this rule may be obtained through
schools, institutions, vendors, manufacturers, formal seminars, online courses, practitioners
certified in a field of practice, a licensed health-care provider or self-study.
(b) Based on how the education or training was obtained, the authorization holder must maintain
the following records of education or training listed in subsection (2)(d) of this rule:
(A) For self-study: A completed self-study form. The self-study form is prescribed by the Office.
(B) Schools, institutions, vendors, manufacturers, formal seminars, or online courses:
(i) Name of education or training sponsor or provider.
(ii) Documentation from the education or training sponsor that expressly shows that the
education or training is related to an item in section (2) of this rule.
(iii) Documentation of attendance and course completion including, but not limited to, certificate,
transcript, sponsor statement, affidavit attesting to attendance, or diploma.
(C) Certified practitioner or licensed health care provider:

(i) Documentation of the content and hours.
(ii) Proof of the certified practitioner’s or licensed health-care provider’s education or training.
(c) The authorization holder must maintain records of education or training for as long as the
authorization holder provides services.
(d) If an authorization holder has not provided services or used items listed in (2)(d) of this rule
within two-years then the authorization holder must obtain additional education or training.

Definition of Esthetics Device
Pursuant to ORS 690.005(12), the Board and the Board of Certified Advanced Estheticians
collaboratively developed this definition of “Device” (esthetics device). This rule sets forth the
specific characteristics of an esthetics device.
(1) An esthetician is limited to performing services with mechanical or electric apparatuses,
appliances, or devices that do not penetrate beyond the epidermis except through natural
physiological effects as defined in OAR 817-015-0045.
(2) An esthetician may use mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances, or devices that
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Galvanic current;
(b) High-frequency;
(c) Microcurrents;
(d) Light-emitting diode therapy;
(e) Microdermabrasion; and
(f) Mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances, or devices used for nanoneedling,
microneedling, and similar procedures; and
(g) Esthetics devices.
(3) An esthetic device must:
(a) Be either mechanical or electrical.
(b) Be capable of, and used for, performing the following skin care or facial care services
pursuant to ORS 690.005(5):
(A) Cleansing;

(B) Stimulating;
(C) Manipulating;
(D) Exfoliating;
(E) Applying lotions or creams.
(c) Have the same risk and safety qualifications as galvanic current, high-frequency,
microcurrents, light-emitting diode therapy, and microdermabrasion.
(4) An esthetic device is not a:
(a) Laser;
(b) Intense pulse light;
(c) Other advanced esthetics devices as specified in OAR 819-030-0000(3);
(d) Needle-free device for injection of dermal fillers or fillers.
(5) An esthetician may not perform skin care or facial care practices or use a mechanical or
electrical apparatus, appliance, or device for medical diagnosis or treatment of disease or
physical or mental ailments.
(6) OAR 817-010-0065 applies to an esthetician using mechanical or electrical apparatuses,
appliances, and devices. It is the responsibility of the esthetician to be trained and educated on
mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances, and devices used and procedures used in the
practice of esthetics pursuant to OAR 817-010-0065.
(7) An esthetician is responsible for determining if any services or mechanical or electrical
apparatuses, appliances, or devices to be used on clients are prohibited by law.
(8) Services provided and mechanical or electrical apparatuses, appliances, or devices used by
estheticians that are prohibited, unsafe, dangerous, or cause harm may result in a violation of
incompetence, negligence, or unprofessional conduct pursuant to ORS 676.612(2)(j) and under
Office or Board rules.
(9) An esthetician is responsible for performing services with mechanical or electrical
apparatuses, appliances, or devices within the esthetics scope of practice as defined in this rule
and ORS 690.005.
(10) An esthetician must practice esthetics safely and in a manner that safeguards the public's
health, safety, and welfare.
(11) An individual certified in esthetics is prohibited from using devices listed in subsection (4) of
this rule.

Esthetics - Natural Physiological Effects
(1) Per ORS 690.005(5)(a) and (12)(a), an esthetician may use a “mechanical or electrical
apparatus, appliance, or device” that does not penetrate beyond the epidermis except through
natural physiological effects for the following skin care or facial care practices performed on the
human body or face for the purpose of keeping the skin of the human body or face healthy and
attractive: cleansing, stimulating, manipulating, exfoliating, or applying lotions or creams.
(2) “Natural physiological effects” means a natural biological response produced by, or that
follows immediately from, and in accordance with, a person’s normal biological functioning.
(3) “Epidermis” means the outermost layer of the skin. The epidermis does not include any
layers of the skin below the epidermis, including, but not limited to, the dermis and muscle.
(4) An esthetician may not use a “mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliance, or device”
beyond the epidermis. An esthetician is presumed to be using a “mechanical or electrical
apparatus, appliance, or device” below the epidermis when:
(a) The esthetician exfoliates or removes the skin below the epidermal layer.
(b) The esthetician destroys or damages the dermis or muscle.
(5) An esthetician using a “mechanical or electrical apparatus, appliance, or device” can only
use the device within the epidermis. The esthetician’s use of the “mechanical or electrical
apparatus, appliance, or device” within the client’s epidermal skin layer may create a natural
body response that may go deeper than the epidermis. For example, an esthetician can use
microcurrent to stimulate the skin within the epidermis. Any increased cellular metabolism,
activity, or exchange below the epidermis from stimulating the epidermal skin would be the
natural physiological effect from the use of the esthetics device.

Chemical Peels
(1) An esthetician is prohibited from performing chemical peels that extend beyond the stratum
basale.
(2) An esthetician must obtain five hours of training or education in each of the following peels
prior to performing either of the chemical peel services:
(a) Very superficial chemical peels.
(b) Superficial chemical peels.

(3) The training or education described in subsection (2) of this rule must be obtained through
schools, institutions, vendors, manufacturers, formal seminars, online courses, an esthetician
experienced in chemical peels, a licensed health-care provider experienced in chemical peels or
through self-study.
(4) Proof of self-study must be documented on a form prescribed by the Office.
(5) Proof of all training or education obtained from schools, institutions, vendors, manufacturers,
formal seminars, online courses must include the following:
(a) Name of continuing education sponsor or provider.
(b) Course agenda and outline – including the date of the training and breakdown of hours for
each agenda item, lunch and breaks; and a detailed summary of each topic discussed and the
learning objective or training goal of each agenda item.
(c) Documentation of attendance and course completion including, but not limited to, certificate,
transcript, sponsor statement, affidavit attesting to attendance or diploma.
(6) The training or education obtained from an esthetician or licensed health care provider with
experience providing chemical peel services must include:
(a) Verification of the content and hours.
(b) Proof of education or training received by the esthetician or licensed health-care provider
providing the education or training.
(7) Records of the required education or training must be kept for as long as the esthetician
provides very superficial or superficial peels and must be provided to Office upon request.
(8) An esthetician who is performing chemical peels must:
(a) Fully comply with the required education or training.
(b) Use chemicals in a manner intended by the manufacturer and in accordance with
manufacturer’s recommendations, guidelines and protocols.
(c) Only use chemicals that the licensed esthetician has been fully educated or trained in the
use of and is fully informed of the ingredients in any products used.
(d) Only use chemicals that are suitable for the client after an analysis of the client’s skin
condition, medical history (including pregnancy if applicable), skin type, currently used
medication and skin-care products.
(e) Chemicals must be stored and maintained in accordance with Division 60 of these rules.

Dermaplaning
(1) Except as needed to acquire the education and training, an esthetician is only permitted to
perform dermaplaning when the six hours of required education and training below are
completed. A minimum of two hours of the education and training must be hands on, practical
training.
(2) The education and training must be obtained through schools, institutions, vendors,
manufacturers, formal seminars, an esthetician experienced in dermaplaning, or a licensed
health-care provider experienced in dermaplaning. Proof of education and training must include:
(a) Name of continuing education sponsor or provider;
(b) Course agenda and outline – including the date and breakdown of hours for each agenda
item, lunch and breaks; and a detailed summary of each topic discussed and the learning
objective or training goal of each agenda item;
(c) Documentation of attendance and successful course completion including, but not limited to,
certificate, transcript, sponsor statement, affidavit attesting to attendance, or diploma.
(3) The education and training obtained through an esthetician or from a licensed health care
provider with experience providing dermaplaning services must include:
(a) Verification of the content and hours; and
(b) Proof of education and training received by the esthetician or licensed health care provider
providing the education and training.
(4) An esthetician who is performing dermaplaning must:
(a) Comply with the required education and training and retain proof of the required education
and training and make the proof available to the Office upon request.
(b) Only use dermaplaning when suitable for the client after an analysis of the client’s skin
condition, medical history (including pregnancy if applicable, skin type, currently used
medication, and skin-care products).
(c) Provide dermaplaning in a manner that is safe for the client.
(5) Dermaplaning blades must be single-use and disposed of after each treatment as required in
OAR 817-010-0060.

Client Records
(1) A practitioner providing esthetic services is responsible for collecting and maintaining copies
of client records. If client records are maintained by the facility, the facility license holder must
provide the practitioner who is providing the service, with copies of those client records upon
request. The record must include:
(a) Client information including the client's name, address, telephone number, type of service,
date of birth, and date of service.
(b) The name of the practitioner and practitioner certificate number who is providing the service,
and special instructions or notations pertinent to providing esthetic services including, but not
limited to, bleeding disorders, allergies or sensitivities to chemicals or products or complications
during service(s).
(c) Medical advice, if obtained.
(2) Client records must be kept at the facility for a minimum of three years and must be made
available upon request from the Office.
(3) Client records must be typed or printed in a legible format and may be stored electronically.
Client records that are not readable by the Office will be treated as incomplete.
(4) If a practitioner is acting in a dual capacity and providing services outside their scope of
practice, the capacity under which the person is working must be clearly documented in the
client’s record.
(5) If providing chemical peels or dermaplaning, or performing services with an esthetics device
or with an esthetics device that is not one of the devices listed in ORS 690.005, the esthetician
must document:
(a) Location of procedure on the body.
(b) Special instructions or notations relating to the client's medical or skin conditions.
(c) Complete list of the client’s sensitivities to medicines or topical solutions.
(d) Description of complications during procedure(s).
(e) Any referral to a health-care professional.
(f) If providing chemical peels, the chemical used on the client, including the brand name or
manufacturer, type of chemical peel, process of applying very superficial or superficial peel
including number of layers of chemical peel solution, the length of time the chemical is left on
the client’s skin, pre- and post-treatment care.
(6) For the purpose of procedures listed in subsection (5) of this rule upon initial visit the
practitioner must obtain signature from the client that they have received and understand the
following information and consent to the nonablative esthetic procedure:

(a) Explanation of procedure.
(b) Risk(s) of the procedure.
(c) Description of potential complications or side effects.
(d) Adverse outcomes.
(e) Contraindications.
(f) Alternatives.
(g) Aftercare instructions.
(7) Following initial visit referenced in subsection (6) of this rule and if for the same procedure a
practitioner may have the client initial, that the client has received information listed in
subsection (6) of this rule and document any refusal to initial the client record.
(8) Information listed in subsection (5), (6) and (7) of this rule may be combined with other
documentation used by the practitioner.
(9) A practitioner is prohibited from providing services to a client who refuses to provide the
personal information required in subsection (1)(a) of this rule unless the client signs a waiver
form documenting the client's refusal to provide the required information. The signed waiver
form must be retained on file in the manner required in subsection (2) of this rule.
(10) For the purpose of this rule, practitioner means an individual certified in esthetics.

Head Lice
Head lice may be treated at the discretion of the authorization holder. Compliance with
OAR Chapter 817, Division 10 Safety and Infection Control Rules and Facility Standards, must
be observed and followed.

Division 40
FEES

Fees
(1) Applicants and authorization holders are subject to provisions of OAR 331-010-0010 and
331-010-0020 regarding payment of fees, penalties and charges.
(2) Fees established by the Office, in consultation with the Board, are as follows:
(a) Application:
(A) Practitioner certificate: $30 per field of practice.
(B) Practitioner certificate by reciprocity: $100 per field of practice.
(C) Independent contractor registration: $70.
(D) Freelance authorization: $35.
(E) Facility license: $140.
(F) Temporary facility permit: $70.
(G) Demonstration permit: $25.
(b) Examination:
(A) Oregon laws & rules: $45.
(B) Barbering: $45.
(C) Hair design: $45.
(D) Esthetics: $45.
(E) Nail technology: $45.
(F) Natural Hair Care: $45.
(c) Original issuance of authorization to practice:
(A) Practitioner certificate: $35 for two years.
(B) Practitioner certificate by reciprocity: $65 for two years.
(C) Independent contractor registration: $140 for one year.
(D) Freelance authorization: $140 for one year.
(E) Facility license: $155 for one year.
(d) Permits:

(A) Temporary facility: $140.
(B) Demonstration: $50.
(e) Renewal of authorization to practice:
(A) Practitioner certificate: $65 for two years. Fee applies to each two-year renewal cycle even
while in inactive status for up to three years.
(B) Independent contractor registration: $140 for one year.
(C) Freelance authorization: $140 for one year.
(D) Facility license: $155 for one year. Fee applies to each renewal cycle even while in inactive
status.
(f) Other administrative fees:
(A) Delinquency fee: $50 for each year in inactive status up to three years.
(B) Replacement of freelance authorization, certificate, license or registration, including name
change: $35.
(C) Duplicate freelance authorization, certificate, license or registration document: $25 per copy
with maximum of three.
(D) Affidavit of licensure: $50.
(E) An additional $25 administrative processing fee will be assessed if a NSF or non-negotiable
instrument is received for payment of fees, penalties and charges. Refer to OAR 331-010-0010.
(F) Information packets: $10.

Division 60
CHEMICAL USE AND STORAGE

Client Protection
(1) All safety procedures which prevent eye, nail, hair, or skin injury to clients or damage to the
clothing of clients must be followed when administering chemical services.
(2) Client protection regulations must be met in accordance with ORS 654, OAR 437-division 2,

Chemical Storage
(1) For the purposes of this section, the following terms are being used as defined by OAR 437,
Division 2, General Occupational Safety and Health Rules Toxic and Hazardous Substances as
amended and in effect September 25, 2012;
(a) Corrosives;
(b) Flammables (aerosol, gas, liquid, and/or solid);
(c) Oxidizers.
(2) For purposes of this section "hazardous" and "segregated in storage" are defined as follows:
(a) "Hazardous" means capable of causing an unplanned, uncontrolled reaction which could
present a hazard to authorization holders or clients by explosion, fire, release of toxic gases or
by-products, or physical or chemical burns; and
(b) "Segregated in storage" means that potentially hazardous chemicals and materials are
separated (to prevent their mixing with one another through leakage, spillage or breakage) by
an adequate distance or through the use of physical barriers such as partitions or separate
shelving.
(3) Chemicals must be stored safely to avoid fire, explosion and bodily injury.
(4) Flammable chemicals must be stored separate from potential sources of ignition.

(5) Chemical containers holding one gallon or less may be stored in the same area or in the
same storage cabinet if one of the following conditions is met:
(a) Containers of reactive chemicals are separated by location or sufficient distance, for
example at least 12 inches apart or on different shelves, to prevent their reaction; or
(b) Glass bottles of reactive chemicals are treated to make them break-resistant (e.g., resin-
coated) or are stored in rubber buckets or sleeves, or are stored with a partition separating
them.
(6) Chemicals that are highly reactive or kept in containers greater than one gallon must be
stored in separate cabinets, in safety-valve containers, or in locations isolated from other
chemicals.
(7) Waste related to chemical services or which has been chemically dampened or saturated
must be disposed of in a fire-retardant container pursuant to OAR 817-010-0035 and 817-010-
0060.
(8) Chemically treated, dampened or saturated towels must be stored in a fire retardant
container pursuant to OAR 817-010-0035 and 817-010-0060.
(9) Chemicals may be stored in containers approved by the Oregon Department of
Transportation for shipping.

Use, Handling and Disposing of Chemicals
(1) Chemicals used for providing services to clients must be mixed in a dispensing area, which
has adequate ventilation away from open flame or other sources of potential ignition.
(2) All chemicals must be disposed of in accordance with their manufacturer’s instructions and
according to local and state environmental requirements.
(3) Authorization holders are prohibited from:
(a) Using cosmetic products containing hazardous substances, which have been banned by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in cosmetic products;

(b) Using products in a manner that is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration;
(c) Using any product containing compounds or substances characterized as hazardous or
harmful to humans by Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) and/or random product testing see
OAR chapter 817 division 060; and
(d) Using an open flame at the workstation during any phase of chemical service.

Use of Formaldehyde Products
(1) An authorization holder providing services with products that may contain formaldehyde
must adhere to all city, county, state or federal laws, rules, codes and regulations related to the
use of formaldehyde.
(2) The Office and Board adopt by reference Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Division
OAR 437-002-0360 effective July 2013.
(3) For the purpose of this rule:
(a) Employer referenced under OAR 437-002-0360 means a facility license holder, temporary
facility permit holder, demonstration permit holder working outside of a licensed facility, a
practitioner working outside of a licensed facility, or an independent contractor.
(b) Employee referenced under OAR 437-002-0360 means a practitioner working in a licensed
facility, individual working under the direction of an independent contractor or facility license
holder, or demonstration permit holder working in a licensed facility.

Division 90
CIVIL PENALTIES
817-090-0025
Schedule of Penalties for Facility and Independent Contractor Registration Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of facility license and independent contractor registration laws and rules. This schedule
applies, except at the discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and
subsequent offenses, the provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Operating or purporting to operate a facility without a valid facility license is a violation of
ORS 690.015(2)(b) or 690.015(2)(e):
(a) Never licensed or expired:
(A) 1st offense: $750;
(B) 2nd offense: $1500;
(C) 3rd offense: $3000;
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(b) Inactive:
(A) 1st offense: $200;
(B) 2nd offense: $500;
(C) 3rd offense: $1000.
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(c) Suspended or Revoked:
(A) 1st offense: $1000;
(B) 2nd offense: $2500;
(C) 3rd offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(2) Operating or purporting to operate as an independent contractor without an independent
contractor registration or with a dormant independent contractor registration is a violation of
ORS 690.015(2)(a), 690.015(2)(d) or 690.015(2)(e):

(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $750;
(c) 3rd offense: $1500;
(d) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(3) Allowing an uncertified employee or uncertified individual under a person’s supervision and
control to practice in a field of practice is a violation of ORS 690.015(2)(g) and OAR 817-007-
0050(1)(d).
(a) Employee or individual who has never been certified:
(A) 1st offense: $2000;
(B) 2nd offense: $3000;
(C) 3rd offense: $4000;
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(b) Employee or individual with inactive, suspended, revoked, or expired certification:
(A) 1st offense: $200
(B) 2nd offense: $500
(C) 3rd offense: $1000
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(4) Failing to meet the specifications and standards required under OAR 817-010-0007 in a
facility is a violation of OAR 817-007-0000, 817-007-0025, and 817-007-0050 and may result in
an emergency suspension of the facility license until the violation is corrected.
Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 690.167, ORS 676.612, ORS 676.992 & ORS 690.015
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 690.167, ORS 676.612, ORS 676.992 & ORS 690.015
History:

Schedule of Penalties for Practitioner Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of practitioner licensing laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the discretion
of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the provisions of
ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Performing, attempting to perform, or purporting to perform services in a field of practice
without proper certification, freelance authorization, temporary practitioner registration or
demonstration permit is a violation of ORS 690.015(2)(a) or 690.015(2)(e).
(a) Never held or expired:
(A) 1st offense: $1000;
(B) 2nd offense: $2500;
(C) 3rd offense $5000.
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(b) Inactive or dormant
(A) 1st offense: $200;
(B) 2nd offense: $500;
(C) 3rd offense: $1000
(D) 4th offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(c) Suspended or revoked:

(A) 1st offense: $2500;
(B) 2nd offense: $5000;
(C) 3rd offense: Monetary penalty and any other actions allowed by law including revocation of
suspended authorization to practice and refusal to issue a new authorization to practice to a
revoked authorization holder.
(2) Failing to display the practitioner certificate number and freelance authorization number
when advertising or soliciting business; or, failing to provide required information under a
Freelance Authorization is a violation of OAR 817-007-0200(1)(a) or (b):
(a) 1st offense: $100;
(b) 2nd offense: $200;
(c) 3rd offense: $500.
(3) Practicing outside a licensed facility without a valid Freelance Authorization is a violation of
ORS 690.015(2)(c):
(a) 1st offense: $500;
(b) 2nd offense: $1000;
(c) 3rd offense: $2500.
(4) Performing in a field of practice by a student when not on the premises of an educational
institution, or while not pursuing the prescribed curriculum in which he or she is enrolled, is a
violation of ORS 690.015(a):
(a) 1st offense: $500;
(b) 2nd offense: $1000;
(c) 3rd offense: $2500.
(5) Failing to comply with notification requirements listed in OAR 331-010-0040, is a violation of
OAR 331-010-0040:
(a) For 1st offense: $100;
(b) For 2nd offense: $200;
(c) For 3rd offense: $500.

Schedule of Penalties for Authorizations Holders
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of certificate/license/registration/permit laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at
the discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Altering with fraudulent intent or fraudulent use, attempted use, obtainment, or counterfeiting
of a license, certificate, registration, permit or authorization issued by the Office is a violation of
ORS 690.015(2)(j) or 690.015(2)(k):
(a) 1st offense: $1500;
(b) 2nd offense: $3500;
(c) 3rd offense: $5000.
(2) Failing to post a valid license, registration, certificate, permit or authorization issued by the
Office in public view is a violation of OAR 817-007-0350:
(a) 1st offense: $200
(b) 2nd offense: $500
(c) 3rd offense: $700
(3) Failing to post the most recent inspection certificate in public view within the facility is a
violation of OAR 817-007-0350:
(a) 1st offense: $200;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;

Page 54 of 71
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

Schedule of Penalties for Home Facility Violations
(1) The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of home facility laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the discretion of the
Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the provisions of ORS
676.992 apply.
(2) Failing to identify a facility located in a residence by means of a house number or a sign
easily visible from the street is a violation of OAR 817-007-0075:
(a) 1st offense: $100;
(b) 2nd offense: $200;
(c) 3rd offense: $500.

Schedule of Penalties for Water Supply and Disposal Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to have immediate access to hot and cold running water in the working area of a
facility is a violation of OAR 817-010-0014(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to have a facility water supply that meets state pressure and purity requirements is a
violation of OAR 817-010-0007 and 817-010-0014(1) and (2) and may result in an emergency
suspension of the facility license until the violation is corrected.
(3) Improperly disposing of liquid waste from a facility is a violation of OAR 817-010-0007 and
817-010-0021(3) and may result in an emergency suspension of the facility license until the
violation is corrected.

Schedule of Penalties for Towels and Linens Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to use clean towels or linens for each client is a violation of OAR 817-010-0035(1)
and failing to launder towels and linens as required is a violation of 817-010-0035(5):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to store clean towels and linens in a clean area is a violation of OAR 817-010-
0035(2):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Failing to immediately deposit all used towels with chemical residue in a closed, fire
retardant container is a violation of OAR 817-010-0035(4):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Failing to deposit soiled towels in a covered container is a violation of OAR 817-010-0035(3):
(a) 1st offense: $100;
(b) 2nd offense: $200;
(c) 3rd offense: $500.

Schedule of Penalties for Waste Disposal Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to immediately deposit all chemical waste materials in a closed container at the
conclusion of each service, or a fire-retardant container at the close of each business day is a
violation of OAR 817-010-0060(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to immediately dispose of all waste and refuse in covered containers is a violation of
OAR 817-010-0060(2) or (3):
(a) 1st offense: $100;
(b) 2nd offense: $200;
(c) 3rd offense: $500.
(3) Failing to keep the outer surface of a waste disposal container clean is a violation of OAR
817-010-0060(4):
(a) 1st offense: $100;
(b) 2nd offense: $200;
(c) 3rd offense: $500.
(4) Failing to dispose of disposable material coming into contact with blood or other bodily fluids
in a sealable plastic bag is a violation of OAR 817-010-0060(5):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

(5) Failing to dispose of disposable sharp-edged material coming into contact with blood or other
bodily fluids in a sealable rigid container is a violation of OAR 817-010-0060(6):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(6) Failing to have sealable plastic bags and sealable rigid containers available for use at all
times services are being performed is a violation of OAR 817-010-0060(7):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
Schedule of Fines for Dispensing of Cosmetic Preparations Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to properly dispense powders, liquids, wave solutions, creams, semi-solid substances
or other materials which come in contact with a client is a violation of OAR 817-010-0055(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

(2) Reuse of any powders, liquids, wave solutions, creams, semi-solid substances, including
paraffin wax or other materials which come in contact with a client is a violation of OAR 817-
010-0055(1) and (2):
(a) 1st offense: $1000;
(b) 2nd offense: $2500;
(c) 3rd offense: $5000.

Schedule of Penalties for Sanitation or Disinfectant Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to use a high-level disinfectant or failing to completely immerse in high-level
disinfectant, all tools and implements with sharp edges or points, or foot spa equipment
according to disinfectant manufacturer’s instructions is a violation of either OAR 817-010-
0068(4) or 817-010-0101(5):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to keep disinfecting solutions at adequate strength, free of foreign material, and/or
available for immediate use at all times the facility is open for business is a violation of OAR
817-010-0068(10):

(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Failing to provide and maintain adequate disinfecting solutions or sterilizing equipment to the
number of applicable authorization holders providing services, usage requirements or volume of
business is a violation of OAR 817-010-0068(9):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Failing to use a low-level disinfectant or failing to completely immerse all tools and
implements, without sharp edges or points according to disinfectant manufacturers instructions
is a violation of OAR 817-010-0068(6):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

Schedule of Penalties for Disinfecting Requirements of Tools and Implements Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.

(1) Failing to cleanse and disinfect, with a high-level disinfectant, electrical or mechanical hair
clipper blades before use on each client is a violation of OAR 817-010-0069(2):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to store new, disinfected or cleaned tools and implements separately from all others
is a violation of OAR 817-010-0075(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Failing to ensure that any tool or implement; or article which comes in contact with a client is
disinfected, cleaned or disposed of is a violation of OAR 817-010-0068(5); or 817-010-0040(2)
or 817-010-0040(3):
(a) 1st offense: $500;
(b) 2nd offense: $1000;
(c) 3rd offense: $2500.
(4) Failing to discard or give to the client any a disposable nail files, pumice blocks, cosmetic
sponges, buffer blocks, sanding bands or sleeves, orangewood sticks, or nail bits designed for
single use after use on a client, is a violation of OAR 817-010-0068(11):
(a) 1st offense: $500;
(b) 2nd offense: $1000;
(c) 3rd offense: $2500.

Schedule of Penalties for Cleanable/Non-Absorbent Surfaces Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to have cleanable, non-absorbent surfaces on all equipment in all areas of a facility
where services are performed is a violation of OAR 817-010-0101(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to keep equipment in a facility, including upholstery fabrics, clean and in good repair
is a violation of OAR 817-010-0101(3):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Failing to have cleanable, non-absorbent floor surfaces in good repair in the area(s) of a
facility where services are performed is a violation of OAR 817-010-0106(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000

Schedule of Penalties for Clean Conditions Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to keep a restroom located on the premises of a facility clean and sanitary is a
violation of OAR 817-010-0021(2):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to keep a facility shampoo bowl or sink clean is a violation of OAR 817-010-0101(2):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Failing to keep roller-storage receptacles and their contents clean and free of foreign
material is a violation of OAR 817-010-0075(2):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Failing to keep storage drawers for clean tools and implements clean and to use such
drawers only for clean tools and implements is a violation of OAR 817-010-0075(3):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(5) Failing to keep storage cabinets, work stations, vanities and backbars or other such
equipment clean is a violation of OAR 817-010-0075(4):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

(6) Allowing hair clippings to accumulate on a facility floor or failing to dispose of hair clippings in
a covered container is a violation of OAR 817-010-0106(3):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(7) Failing to keep facility walls and ceiling clean and free of excessive spots, mildew,
condensation or peeling paint is a violation of OAR 817-010-0110:
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(8) Failing to properly clean and disinfect foot spa equipment as required is a violation of OAR
817-010-0101(5):
(a) 1st offense: $500;
(b) 2nd offense: $1000;
(c) 3rd offense: $2500.

Schedule of Penalties for Client Health and Safety Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.

(1) Failing to use a neck strip or a towel to prevent contact between the skin of a client's neck
and a hair cloth or cape is a violation of OAR 817-010-0040(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to use a disposable cover on the head of a client who is trying on a hairpiece or to
clean and label used hair goods as "used" prior to resale is a violation of OAR 817-010-0085:
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(3) Performing services without washing one's hands immediately before and after serving each
client is a violation of OAR 817-015-0030(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Failing to maintain client records for each client receiving esthetics services on the premises
of the facility, or allow an enforcement officer access to review client records upon request is a
violation of OAR 817-015-0065:
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(5) Failing to maintain required documentation of any manual, mechanical or electrical
apparatuses, appliances or devices, or to provide required documentation upon request is a
violation of OAR 817-010-0065 or OAR 817-015-0025:
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

Schedule of Penalties for Safe Working Conditions Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of safety and infection control laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to meet the requirements of the Oregon Indoor Clean Air Act is a violation of OAR
817-010-0007 and may result in an emergency suspension of the facility license until the
violation is corrected.
(2) Having frayed electrical wiring or overloading the electrical circuits in a facility is a violation of
ORS 690.055(1)(c), and OAR 817-010-0007 and may result in an emergency suspension of the
facility license until the violation is corrected.
(3) Having pets or other animals in facilities, other than service animals recognized by the
American with Disabilities Act, fish in an aquarium is a violation of OAR 817-010-0095.
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Failing to wear eye goggles, shields or mask in performing services on a client where the
likelihood of splattering is present is a violation of OAR 817-015-0030(1)(c):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

(5) Failing to have a restroom available that is "reasonably accessible" for facility employees is a
violation of OAR 817-010-0021(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000

Schedule of Penalties for Chemical Use and Storage Violations
The Office has adopted the following presumptive penalty schedule for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
violation of chemical use and storage laws and rules. This schedule applies, except at the
discretion of the Office pursuant to ORS 676.992. For the 4th and subsequent offenses, the
provisions of ORS 676.992 apply.
(1) Failing to store chemicals safely to avoid fire, explosion and/or bodily harm to clients and
authorization holders is a violation of OAR 817-060-0020(3):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(2) Failing to mix chemicals in a dispensing area is a violation of OAR 817-060-0030(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

(3) Mixing or using chemicals near an open flame or other potential source of ignition is a
violation of OAR 817-060-0030(1):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.
(4) Having an open flame at the workstation, during any phase of chemical service, i.e. mixing,
application, processing, or use of any potentially explosive or flammable chemical, in relation to
performing services is a violation of OAR 817-060-0030(4)(d):
(a) 1st offense: $300;
(b) 2nd offense: $500;
(c) 3rd offense: $1000.

Division 100
CLARIFICATION OF EXEMPTIONS

Domestic Administration
Domestic Administration under ORS 690.025(1) means a person providing services in a location
where the client or person resides, and the services are provided only to persons who are
related by blood, marriage, or domestic partnership.

Licensed Health Care Facility
(1) Under ORS 690.025(1)(c) the provisions of ORS 690.005 to 690.235 do not apply to persons
who are acting under the authority of a hospital or long-term care facility licensed under ORS
441.025 or a residential facility licensed under ORS 443.415.
(2) Persons exempt under ORS 690.025(1)(c) are limited to providing well-being care and
personal hygiene services, including, but not limited to, basic skin and nail care, and washing,
brushing, and combing hair on individuals residing at the hospital or long-term care facility
licensed under ORS 441.025 or the residential facility licensed under ORS 443.415.
(3) Persons exempt under ORS 690.025(1)(c) are prohibited from providing chemical services,
including but not limited to permanent waving and coloring of hair, temporary hair removal, and
applying or removing artificial nails to individuals residing at the hospital or long-term care facility
licensed under ORS 441.025 or the residential facility licensed under ORS 443.415.
(4) Persons providing services in a facility established within a hospital or long-term care facility
licensed under ORS 441.025 or a residential facility licensed under ORS 443.415 are required
to obtain a facility license under OAR 817-007-0000 and OAR 817-007-0025 when services in
a field of practice defined under ORS 690.005 are being performed whether or not the individual
receiving the service is residing at the hospital, long-term care facility or residential facility.
(5) For the purpose of this rule, residential facility means a facility licensed under ORS 443.415
and defined under OAR 411-054-0005(48).
(6) For the purpose of this rule, a hospital or long-term care facility means a facility licensed

Division 120
CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

Practice Standards
(1) Authorization holders must adhere to all applicable Office laws and rules listed in ORS
676.560 to 676.660 and OAR Chapter 331 divisions 1 through 30.
(2) Authorization holders must practice in a manner that safeguards the public's health, safety,
and welfare.
(3) An authorization holder is responsible for determining if any practice would be prohibited by
law.
(4) Services provided to clients by an authorization holder that are prohibited, unsafe,
dangerous or causes harm may result in a violation of incompetence, negligence or
unprofessional conduct pursuant to ORS 676.612(2)(j) and under Office rules.
